devdoc/adr/2023-06-supporting-basic-integer-types.adoc, before:

= 2023-06 Supporting Basic Integer Types

// SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2023 Mark Rotteveel
// SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0

== Status

* Published: 2023-07-10
* Implemented in: 2.0

== Type

* Feature-Specification

== Context

Firebird external table files have a binary format, and support data types other than `CHAR` for columns.
External tables do not support the `NULL` value.

For this ADR, we only cover the basic integer types:

[horizontal]
`SMALLINT`:: 16-bit signed integer
`INTEGER`:: 32-bit signed integer
`BIGINT`:: 64-bit signed integer (not supported in dialect 1)
`INT128`:: 128-bit signed integer (introduced in Firebird 4.0)

The storage is endian-sensitive, depending on the platform of the target Firebird server.

Numeric presentation in CSV is not formalized in https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc4180[RFC 4180^].

In Java, the Firebird data types can be mapped as follows:

* `SMALLINT` -> `java.lang.Short`/`short`
* `INTEGER` -> `java.lang.Integer`/`int`
* `BIGINT` -> `java.lang.Long`/`long`
* `INT128` -> `java.math.BigInteger` and/or `java.math.BigDecimal`

The Java types all provide methods or constructors to parse string values to their respective types, allowing for a radix in the range `[2, 36]`.

The `BigInteger` class has a `toByteArray()` method which converts the value to a big-endian two's-complement with the minimum size necessary to represent the number.
For the other types, manual bit-manipulation is needed or use of a `java.nio.ByteBuffer` with the appropriate byte order set.

For a `BigInteger`, the method `bitLength()` can be used to check if a value is in range (it returns the minimum number of bits except the sign-bit).

For inspiration, also look at Jaybird's `org.firebirdsql.gds.ng.DefaultDatatypeCoder` and its subclasses.

In Java, byte order is represented by `java.nio.ByteOrder`.
Its method `nativeOrder()` can be used to detect the byte order of the runtime platform.

== Decision

=== Integer Support

_ext-table-gen_ will support the four integer data types (`SMALLINT`, `INTEGER`, `BIGINT` and `INT128`).

These types will only be available by editing the configuration file, they will not be derived automatically by parsing the CSV.

Initially, we will only support parsing decimal (radix 10) values, following the normal Java parsing rules.
Expressed as a regex, we'll parse numbers of the following format:

[source,regexp]
----
[+-]?[0-9]+
----

Empty or blank values from the CSV will be interpreted as value `0`.
Other values not matching above pattern will produce an error.
Values outside the range of their respective types will produce an error.
Validation of format and range will only happen while writing the external table.

In the XML config, the data types will be represented by elements:

* `smallint`
* `integer`
* `bigint`
* `int128`

These elements will not have any attributes in this initial design.
At the moment, we foresee that if additional radixes or other conversions are introduced, this will be configured with nested elements specifying the appropriate conversion and configuration (that said, that is just a quick thought, and not set in stone).

== Byte Order

The configuration will record the byte order to apply.

In the XML config, this will be recorded in an optional attribute `byteOrder` on `/extTableGenConfig/externalTable` with possible values `BIG_ENDIAN`, `LITTLE_ENDIAN` and `AUTO`.
With value `AUTO`, the actual byte order is selected at runtime based on the byte order from `ByteOrder.nativeOrder()`.
The value is optional for backwards compatibility with version 1.0 of the XSD.
If the attribute is absent, the value of `AUTO` is used, and the runtime byte order returned by `ByteOrder.nativeOrder()` is applied;
the `AUTO` value is preserved when writing the configuration back.

The byte order can be set (or overridden) using commandline option `--byte-order`, with values `BIG_ENDIAN`, `LITTLE_ENDIAN` and `AUTO`.
When no value is specified, and no XML config was read, the runtime value of `ByteOrder.nativeOrder()` is used to select `BIG_ENDIAN` or `LITTLE_ENDIAN`.
This is the effective value of `AUTO`, but with the difference that explicitly specifying `AUTO` will preserve that value in the configuration.

== Consequences

The documentation must be updated to explain how to use these new data types, and to describe the configuration changes

See also previous section for some implementation consequences.

Commit message:

#11 Include description of alignment in jdp-2023-06

devdoc/adr/2023-06-supporting-basic-integer-types.adoc, after:

= 2023-06 Supporting Basic Integer Types

// SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2023 Mark Rotteveel
// SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0

== Status

* Published: 2023-07-10
* Implemented in: 2.0

== Type

* Feature-Specification

== Context

Firebird external table files have a binary format, and support data types other than `CHAR` for columns.
External tables do not support the `NULL` value.

For this ADR, we only cover the basic integer types:

[horizontal]
`SMALLINT`:: 16-bit signed integer
`INTEGER`:: 32-bit signed integer
`BIGINT`:: 64-bit signed integer (not supported in dialect 1)
`INT128`:: 128-bit signed integer (introduced in Firebird 4.0)

The storage is endian-sensitive, depending on the platform of the target Firebird server.

The storage of the integral data types has alignment requirements.
This alignment is calculated for the offset in the current row, and takes into account the null mask of a row, which is not written for an external table.
The null mask is 4 bytes per 32 columns.

The following alignment is used:

[horizontal]
`SMALLINT`:: 2 bytes
`INTEGER`:: 4 bytes
`BIGINT`:: 8 bytes
`INT128`:: 8 bytes

Alignment is achieved by writing padding with NUL bytes so the offset for the value to write is a multiple of the alignment.
If the first column needs alignment, it is not written to the file, but just like the null mask, it is counted towards the offset within the row.

Numeric presentation in CSV is not formalized in https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc4180[RFC 4180^].

In Java, the Firebird data types can be mapped as follows:

* `SMALLINT` -> `java.lang.Short`/`short`
* `INTEGER` -> `java.lang.Integer`/`int`
* `BIGINT` -> `java.lang.Long`/`long`
* `INT128` -> `java.math.BigInteger` and/or `java.math.BigDecimal`

The Java types all provide methods or constructors to parse string values to their respective types, allowing for a radix in the range `[2, 36]`.

The `BigInteger` class has a `toByteArray()` method which converts the value to a big-endian two's-complement with the minimum size necessary to represent the number.
For the other types, manual bit-manipulation is needed or use of a `java.nio.ByteBuffer` with the appropriate byte order set.

For a `BigInteger`, the method `bitLength()` can be used to check if a value is in range (it returns the minimum number of bits except the sign-bit).

For inspiration, also look at Jaybird's `org.firebirdsql.gds.ng.DefaultDatatypeCoder` and its subclasses.

In Java, byte order is represented by `java.nio.ByteOrder`.
Its method `nativeOrder()` can be used to detect the byte order of the runtime platform.

== Decision

=== Integer Support

_ext-table-gen_ will support the four integer data types (`SMALLINT`, `INTEGER`, `BIGINT` and `INT128`).

These types will only be available by editing the configuration file, they will not be derived automatically by parsing the CSV.

Initially, we will only support parsing decimal (radix 10) values, following the normal Java parsing rules.
Expressed as a regex, we'll parse numbers of the following format:

[source,regexp]
----
[+-]?[0-9]+
----

Empty or blank values from the CSV will be interpreted as value `0`.
Other values not matching above pattern will produce an error.
Values outside the range of their respective types will produce an error.
Validation of format and range will only happen while writing the external table.

In the XML config, the data types will be represented by elements:

* `smallint`
* `integer`
* `bigint`
* `int128`

These elements will not have any attributes in this initial design.
At the moment, we foresee that if additional radixes or other conversions are introduced, this will be configured with nested elements specifying the appropriate conversion and configuration (that said, that is just a quick thought, and not set in stone).

== Byte Order

The configuration will record the byte order to apply.

In the XML config, this will be recorded in an optional attribute `byteOrder` on `/extTableGenConfig/externalTable` with possible values `BIG_ENDIAN`, `LITTLE_ENDIAN` and `AUTO`.
With value `AUTO`, the actual byte order is selected at runtime based on the byte order from `ByteOrder.nativeOrder()`.
The value is optional for backwards compatibility with version 1.0 of the XSD.
If the attribute is absent, the value of `AUTO` is used, and the runtime byte order returned by `ByteOrder.nativeOrder()` is applied;
the `AUTO` value is preserved when writing the configuration back.

The byte order can be set (or overridden) using commandline option `--byte-order`, with values `BIG_ENDIAN`, `LITTLE_ENDIAN` and `AUTO`.
When no value is specified, and no XML config was read, the runtime value of `ByteOrder.nativeOrder()` is used to select `BIG_ENDIAN` or `LITTLE_ENDIAN`.
This is the effective value of `AUTO`, but with the difference that explicitly specifying `AUTO` will preserve that value in the configuration.

== Consequences

The documentation must be updated to explain how to use these new data types, and to describe the configuration changes

See also previous section for some implementation consequences.
